In this video, we're going to take a break
from databases, and we're gonna look at exceptions
and exception handling in Python.
Let's start by creating a new project.
You should always select Python, as always.
Next, and we're gonna call this project ExceptionHandling.
Okay, and let's create a new file
in the project, and we'll call that Examples.
New Python file, Examples.
Okay, let's go to full screen.
All right, so let's experiment with some code.
Now, there's two types of errors we can get.
There's syntax errors and exceptions.
Now, syntax errors, I'm sure you've seen before,
are where we make a mistake in the code.
As an example, if I type something like
x equals 8 equals 5,
instead of x equals 8 minus 5,
we actually get a syntax error.
If I actually try and run this,
we get this error over here,
which I'll just change to the bottom.
We can see we got the error: can't assign to literal.
Now, we can fix these types of errors, obviously,
by fixing our code so that it's valid part in code,
and then of course, the programme is gonna run.
Okay, no surprises there,
but when our programmes are running, though,
we may actually get other errors as a result
of flaws in the code's logic,
or conditions that we couldn't predict.
For example, we might attempt to create a new database,
but there isn't enough space on the drive that we specify.
These types of errors are exceptions.
In the next few videos, we're going
to look at dealing with them when they happen.
Now, the thing to remember is if you don't handle
an exception in your code when it occurs,
then the programme actually crashes,
and that's almost always not a good thing
from a user's perspective.
Now, it turns out that it is very easy
to generate an exception.
We can come up here, and on the second line,
I can put something like y equals x divided by 0,
and if I run that, we should see an error,
an exception, rather, a ZeroDivisionError.
You can see we've got just that on line two,
ZeroDivisionError: division by zero.
If we don't handle an exception,
it is called an unhandled exception,
and execution of the programme stops,
as you can see has happened in this case.
Python then prints out the details of the exception
and a stack trace showing where the exception occurred.
In our case, as you can see, it was on line two,
and the exception details are, again,
ZeroDivisionError: division by zero.
This first part over here before the colon
is the type of the exception, its name, if you like,
but the details after the colon are the extra information
added to the exception when it occurs.
In this particular case, it's quite a simple description,
but you can add the values of variables
to the exception, if you want.
We'll be seeing how to do that
when we raise our own exceptions a little bit later.
You can get a list of all the built-in exceptions
by going to this link.
There's quite a few exceptions as you can see here,
so I'm scrolling down.
I'm certainly not going to attempt
to go through them all now, but this page is useful
because it goes into the mechanics
of exception handling in great detail,
but I recommend you don't read through it just yet,
because much of it will be quite confusing at first.
It is interesting to skip through or skim through
the list of exceptions in section 5.2.
Down here.
Really just to, more or less, get a feel
for the sorts of exceptions that are available
for you to check in your code.
Now, as I scroll through, one interesting one,
as we scroll through here, is this RecursionError.
Now, back in section 11, we looked at recursive functions,
and wrote a recursive function to generate factorials.
Now, if you tried to run that with large numbers,
above 1,000 would've done it, then the stack overflows,
and you end up with a RecursionError.
Let's try and do that again.
Now, it's only a few lines of code,
so I'm just going to type it in again,
but if you've got the code from section 11
in the video Name Spaces: More On Scope and Recursion,
you can grab it from there if you prefer not to type it in.
I'm gonna type it in, def factorial(n):,
and then we wanna do just a reminder
that the factorial n can also be defined
as n times n, take one,
and calculates n recursively.
This is essentially what we're doing here.
All right, so in terms of the code,
it's if n is less than or equal to one, return one,
else return n times factorial,
n take one.
Now, we can actually try this
by doing a print factorial, and let's start with 50.
That actually runs without any error,
so let's change that to a larger number, say 900.
We can see we've now got a huge number here,
but it has still worked.
Now, this may or may not work on your system.
It really does depend on how much memory
you've allocated for IntelliJ.
If you get a RecursionError already, that's fine,
but on my system, obviously, it's working with 900,
and we obviously have this huge number printed.
I'll come back to that in a moment.
All right, so let's actually try a thousand now.
Gonna run that again.
We actually get this error now,
RecursionError: maximum recursion depth
exceeded in comparison.
Now, in this case, there's not really a lot we can do
to fix this problem, unless we rewrite
our factorial function, of course,
but what we can do is prevent the programme from crashing.
The way we wanna do that is come down here,
and on line nine, you type in try, colon,
then we add our print on that line.
I'm going to initially change that back to 900.
Then I'll come down here and type except,
then RecursionError.
Print, "This programme cannot calculate
"factorials that large."
Then here I'll do a print, "Programme terminating."
All right, so what I've done there is put the code
that's likely to raise an exception into a try block.
We did that by starting this new block with the try keyword.
Now, the code that's in between the try and the except
is executed, and runs as per normal.
If everything works fine, then the code that appears
after this except line is skipped,
and the programme continues to run.
However, if an exception is raised inside the try clause,
execution will jump straight to this code that's immediately
after the except line, or the except clause.
Now, once the code in the except clause
is finished executing, the programme will then continue
with the code after the trial,
so it should print, "Programme terminating," in this case.
We'll just do a test of this to run it,
to make sure it does do that,
and you can see that we've got the normal output
we had previously with the value of 900,
and we've also got this extra message
that the programme is terminating.
Let's change this number back to a thousand,
that we now know will actually generate an exception.
If we run that now,
you can see what's happened down here now.
The programme still raises an exception,
but because the code is now inside the try clause,
the programme hasn't crashed this time.
Instead, what's happened is it's executed the code
in the except clause, and we get the message:
"This programme cannot calculate factorials that large."
Execution then continues on,
and we see the programme terminating message,
which we also got when the programme worked successfully.
That really, that's basically all
there is to exception handling.
You wrap your code that's likely
to raise an exception inside try and except.
You then decide what action
to take if an exception is raised.
Now, in this particular case, we just printed a message,
but if you're updating records in a database, for example,
then you could roll back the transaction,
and we're actually going to be doing that soon.
Exception handling's a really very useful feature.
At the very least, you can prevent your code
from crashing when something unexpected happens.
In many situations, you can allow the programme
to recover from whatever caused the error,
and maybe even retry the operation
that failed, if that was appropriate.
Okay, so let's have a look
at that exception clause now in more detail.
Now, in its simplest form,
it can just be the keyword except,
and we'll have a look at that in a minute.
In our programme, we actually specified
which exception we wanted to handle.
A RecursionError, in this case, this is the code on line 11.
We don't expect any other type of exception
to be raised by our factorial function.
It's good practise to be explicit
about which exceptions you're handling,
and you can have several except clauses if you want to.
Let's add a division by zero into our factorial function,
so we can see what happens when we get an exception
that we haven't specified in the except clause.
I'll come down here, and let's just add a line here
that we know is gonna generate an exception.
We'll do a print n divided by zero,
which we know a divided by zero will give us
that exception we saw at the start of the video.
We just run this to see what happens.
You'll notice here that we have got
a ZeroDivisionError: division by zero.
Now, you wouldn't normally do something like I've just done.
I've only added the code on line seven
purely to raise an exception,
so that we can see what happens,
and more on how to handle
more than one exception in our code.
When we run the programme, we got this ZeroDivisionError.
That's because we've only handled RecursionError,
at the moment, and as a result the programme crashes.
When an exception is raised in a try block,
Python checks the except clauses to see
if there's one that handles that particular exception.
Now, in our case, we didn't have one,
so the exception wasn't handled and the programme crashed.
Now, as I mentioned, we can add
more than one except clause though.
Let's go ahead and do that.
Come down here after the output we want executed
in the case of the RecursionError exception.
Here, we'll type except on the next line,
and this time it's going to be ZeroDivisionError, colon,
and we'll just print out some output,
which will be, "What are you doing dividing by zero?"
All right, so now when we run the programme,
this time it doesn't crash, and you can see that we've got,
"What are you doing dividing by zero?" showing as output.
We're now handling the ZeroDivisionError,
as well as the RecursionError.
Now, in this particular case,
assuming that the factorial function
really could raise a ZeroDivisionError,
we've probably taken the right approach.
By using two separate except clauses,
we can display a message that's appropriate
for the specific exception that was raised,
but there is an alternate way of doing this.
We can handle more than one exception
in a single except clause.
We can modify our code here,
and we can actually come along here,
and add parenthesis around our exception.
Left parenthesis, then I'm gonna put a comma,
then ZeroDivisionError, right parenthesis,
and I'm gonna leave the message that currently shows,
and I'm gonna delete the second exception line.
Even though if our ZeroDivisionError occurs,
the output probably isn't going to be appropriate,
because it's talking still about factorials.
It is proof that we can do it.
Let's actually test this out, so we'll run.
We get the message, "The programme calculates,"
and that should be, "This programme
"cannot calculate factorials that large."
Let's just try running it again.
All right, so we currently get that message,
"This programme cannot calculate factorials that large,"
even though, in effect, the ZeroDivisionError
was the error that we caught in this particular occasion.
You can see the exception handler
isn't really appropriate for the exception we got.
Now, even with a small number, we'd see the message,
"This programme cannot calculate factorials that large,"
when really the problem was the division by zero.
It is useful to have one handler for multiple exceptions,
but if you need to do something different
for different exceptions, then use separate except clauses
instead of what I've done here.
Of course, we saw the separate except clauses
a few minutes ago in the video.
All right, so looking at our factorial function,
what else could go wrong with it?
Well, if you've got someone like me
performing division by zero all over the place,
then the answer's pretty much anything,
but with sensible code, one thing that might happen
is that the resulting number
gets too large for Python to handle.
Now, when that happens, that is when a number
is too big to be represented by the computer,
you get something called overflow.
Now, if you're used to languages such as C or Java,
you may have come across this.
In Python, though, it's extremely difficult
to overflow an integer, but there is an exception for it
if we wanna be really sure that our code won't crash.
Let's go back to that list of exceptions
in the browser that we looked at earlier.
We've got this RecursionError that we've looked at,
but there's also this OverflowError.
The OverflowError is raised when the result
of an arithmetic operation is too large to be represented.
As the documentation states there,
this can't occur for integers.
You'd run out of memory first.
This might seem really strange to see for Java programmers,
but Python can handle incredibly large numbers
without having to use special classes to do so.
I'm gonna go back to the code, and let's remove that row,
division by zero line, the one on line seven.
I'm gonna go back and change that factorial to 900,
so that it doesn't, or it's not crashing anymore.
Let's just run this again.
You can see the number
that's outputted there is absolutely huge.
What I'm going to do, because you can't really see it
in the output window too well,
so I'm just gonna load up an editor, a text editor.
I'm gonna paste it into there.
Now, obviously this is quite a huge number.
We can only sort of zoom it up so far.
Now, I want to put this huge number
that Python can do within to context,
and that's why I've pasted it into this editor.
Now, you will struggle a little bit
if you use Notepad on Windows,
because the number's too big to fit on one line in Notepad,
but you'll still see the effect
if you're doing this on your computer.
On the line below, I'm going to paste in another number.
This is the number of atoms in the known universe.
The upper bound for the number of atoms in the universe
is estimated to be four times to the power of 82.
I'll paste that in here.
We'll just look at the results there.
Python's calculated a result significantly larger than that.
If I just scroll over, look how far
I can actually scroll this number over,
the number is absolutely huge.
Absolutely huge number.
The point here is that there's really no point checking
for an overflow operation in our code.
It's really just not going to happen,
but if it were possible, then that would be a good case
for using the same exception handler.
If overflow was possible, it would be caused
by too large a number, which is the same thing
that results in our RecursionError.
In other words, coming back to the code,
we might end up doing something like
putting an OverflowError in there,
and combining those exceptions.
In other words, here it would make sense
to use the same handler for both exceptions.
This also emphasises that is really is worth reading
the documentation for the exceptions
that you plan to handle.
Now, if we really were concerned
about the result getting too big
before a RecursionError was raised,
we might be better off handling MemoryError,
as the documentation suggested on the other page,
rather than the OverflowError.
All right, that's the basics of exception handling,
and there isn't really much more to it than that.
There's some fine details that we should know about
to give us a bit more control
in how we actually handle exceptions,
and we'll be looking at those next,
but before all that in the next video,
let's start off with a challenge.
I'll see you in the next video.